.\" Manpage for vimlrs.
.\" Contact https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/vimlrs to correct errors or omissions.
.TH VIMLRS 1 "2026-06-29" "vimlrs 0.1.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
vimlrs \- VimL (Vimscript) interpreter that runs .vim scripts standalone, outside Vim
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vimlrs
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR ...]
.br
.B vimlrs
\fB\-e\fR \fIEXPR\fR
.br
.B vimlrs
\fB\-c\fR \fICMD\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vimlrs
is the first compiled standalone VimL interpreter: it takes Vim's eval engine
out of the editor and runs
.B .vim
scripts as ordinary programs. The language semantics are ported faithfully from
Neovim's C
.I eval/*
tree \(em the C source is the spec \(em rather than re-invented.
.PP
.B vimlrs
carries no VM or JIT of its own. It lexes and parses VimL to an AST, lowers that
to
.B fusevm
bytecode, and lets the shared engine run it \(em the same engine (with a
three-tier Cranelift JIT) behind
.BR zshrs ,
.BR stryke ,
.BR awkrs ,
and
.BR elisp .
The pipeline is:
.PP
.RS
.nf
VimL source \(rh lexer \(rh parser (AST) \(rh lower to fusevm bytecode \(rh fusevm VM + Cranelift JIT
.fi
.RE
.PP
Hot numeric loops trace-JIT to native machine code at both function and
top-level scope; dynamic operations fall back to the bytecode interpreter.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I FILE
Source the VimL script \fIFILE\fR (cached as fusevm bytecode). Multiple files
are sourced in order; their paths seed the script arglist (\fBargv()\fR /
\fBargc()\fR).
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-expr " " \fIEXPR\fR
Evaluate a single VimL expression and print its value (as \fB:echo\fR would
render it).
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-cmd " " \fICMD\fR
Execute a single ex command line, e.g. \fB\-c 'echo 1 + 1'\fR.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-build " " \fIOUT\fR
AOT build: bake the given script files into a self-contained executable at
\fIOUT\fR.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-native
With
.BR \-\-build ,
AOT-compile to native machine code (a standalone-linked Cranelift object)
instead of embedding the source.
.TP
.B \-\-clear\-cache
Delete the rkyv bytecode script cache and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-lsp
Run the Language Server Protocol server on stdio (for editors).
.TP
.B \-\-dap
Run the Debug Adapter Protocol server on stdio (for editors).
.TP
.B \-\-disasm
Print the fusevm bytecode listing before running.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.PP
With no arguments,
.B vimlrs
starts a read-eval-print loop on stdin: each line is one statement \(em a bare
expression prints its value, an \fB:echo\fR/\fB:let\fR runs for effect. Ctrl-D
exits.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B VIMLRS_JIT_STATS
When set, report how many loop traces were JIT-compiled.
.TP
.B VIMLRS_NO_JIT
When set, force the bytecode interpreter baseline (disable the Cranelift JIT).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B vimlrs
exits 0 on success and non-zero if a file cannot be sourced, an expression fails
to parse/compile, or evaluation raises an error (\fBemsg\fR).
.SH EXAMPLES
Evaluate an expression:
.PP
.RS
.nf
vimlrs \-e 'map(range(5), {_, v -> v * v})'   \(rh [0, 1, 4, 9, 16]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run one ex command:
.PP
.RS
.nf
vimlrs \-c 'echo "hello" . " world"'
.fi
.RE
.PP
Source a script:
.PP
.RS
.nf
vimlrs script.vim
.fi
.RE
.PP
Observe the JIT on a hot loop:
.PP
.RS
.nf
VIMLRS_JIT_STATS=1 vimlrs loop.vim
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vimlrsall (1).
Reference and engineering report: https://menketechnologies.github.io/vimlrs/ .
.B fusevm:
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/fusevm .
.SH AUTHOR
MenkeTechnologies <https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies>.
.SH LICENSE
MIT.
