.\" Manpage for viml (the vimlrs VimL interpreter).
.\" Contact https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/vimlrs to correct errors or omissions.
.TH VIML 1 "2026-07-13" "viml 0.2.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
viml \- VimL (Vimscript) interpreter that runs .vim scripts standalone, outside Vim
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B viml
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR ...]
.br
.B viml
\fB\-e\fR \fIEXPR\fR
.br
.B viml
\fB\-c\fR \fICMD\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B viml
is the first compiled standalone VimL interpreter: it takes Vim's eval engine
out of the editor and runs
.B .vim
scripts as ordinary programs. The language semantics are ported faithfully from
Neovim's C
.I eval/*
tree \(em the C source is the spec \(em rather than re-invented.
.PP
.B viml
carries no VM or JIT of its own. It lexes and parses VimL to an AST, lowers that
to
.B fusevm
bytecode, and lets the shared engine run it \(em the same engine (with a
three-tier Cranelift JIT) behind
.BR zshrs ,
.BR stryke ,
.BR awkrs ,
and
.BR elisp .
The pipeline is:
.PP
.RS
.nf
VimL source \(rh lexer \(rh parser (AST) \(rh lower to fusevm bytecode \(rh fusevm VM + Cranelift JIT
.fi
.RE
.PP
Hot numeric loops trace-JIT to native machine code at both function and
top-level scope; dynamic operations fall back to the bytecode interpreter.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I FILE
Source the VimL script \fIFILE\fR (cached as fusevm bytecode). Multiple files
are sourced in order; their paths seed the script arglist (\fBargv()\fR /
\fBargc()\fR).
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-expr " " \fIEXPR\fR
Evaluate a single VimL expression and print its value (as \fB:echo\fR would
render it).
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-cmd " " \fICMD\fR
Execute a single ex command line, e.g. \fB\-c 'echo 1 + 1'\fR.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-build " " \fIOUT\fR
AOT build: bake the given script files into a self-contained executable at
\fIOUT\fR.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-native
With
.BR \-\-build ,
AOT-compile to native machine code (a standalone-linked Cranelift object)
instead of embedding the source.
.TP
.B \-\-clear\-cache
Delete the rkyv bytecode script cache and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-lsp
Run the Language Server Protocol server on stdio (for editors).
.TP
.B \-\-dap
Run the Debug Adapter Protocol server on stdio (for editors).
.TP
.B \-\-disasm
Print the fusevm bytecode listing before running.
.TP
.B \-\-repl
Force the interactive REPL: a \fBreedline\fR line editor with a live ASCII
stats banner, Tab completion drawn from the builtin/ex-command/\fBv:\fR-var
wordlist, command history in \fB~/.vimlrs/history\fR, and an emacs or vi edit
mode (set via \fB~/.vimlrs/config.toml\fR \fB[repl] mode\fR or the
\fBVIMLRS_REPL_MODE\fR environment variable). Implied when no other mode is
given and standard input is a terminal.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.PP
With no arguments,
.B viml
starts a read-eval-print loop: each line is one statement \(em a bare
expression prints its value, an \fB:echo\fR/\fB:let\fR runs for effect. Ctrl-D
exits. On a terminal this is the full interactive REPL (see \fB\-\-repl\fR);
when standard input is a pipe or file it is a plain line-oriented reader.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B VIMLRS_JIT_STATS
When set, report how many loop traces were JIT-compiled.
.TP
.B VIMLRS_NO_JIT
When set, force the bytecode interpreter baseline (disable the Cranelift JIT).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B viml
exits 0 on success and non-zero if a file cannot be sourced, an expression fails
to parse/compile, or evaluation raises an error (\fBemsg\fR).
.SH EXAMPLES
Evaluate an expression:
.PP
.RS
.nf
viml \-e 'map(range(5), {_, v -> v * v})'   \(rh [0, 1, 4, 9, 16]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run one ex command:
.PP
.RS
.nf
viml \-c 'echo "hello" . " world"'
.fi
.RE
.PP
Source a script:
.PP
.RS
.nf
viml script.vim
.fi
.RE
.PP
Observe the JIT on a hot loop:
.PP
.RS
.nf
VIMLRS_JIT_STATS=1 viml loop.vim
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vimlall (1).
Reference and engineering report: https://menketechnologies.github.io/vimlrs/ .
.B fusevm:
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/fusevm .
.SH AUTHOR
MenkeTechnologies <https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies>.
.SH LICENSE
MIT.
