.\" vimlall(1) — comprehensive all-in-one man page for viml (the vimlrs interpreter)
.\" Modeled after zshall(1): every man page in one document.
.\" Render with:  man -l man/man1/vimlall.1
.\" Install:      cp man/man1/vimlall.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
.TH VIMLALL 1 "2026-07-13" "viml 0.2.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
vimlall \- the viml comprehensive reference (invocation, pipeline, JIT,
value layer, port philosophy, status)
.SH OVERVIEW
This is the all-in-one
.B viml
reference. For the concise command page see
.BR viml (1).
.PP
.B viml
is the first compiled standalone VimL (Vimscript) interpreter. Vimscript has
only ever run embedded inside Vim or Neovim;
.B viml
takes the eval engine out of the editor and runs
.B .vim
scripts as ordinary programs. It is one of the languages hosted on the
.B fusevm
bytecode VM, alongside
.BR zshrs ", " stryke ", " awkrs ", and " elisp .
.SH INVOCATION
.B viml
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR ...]
.PP
See
.BR viml (1)
for the full option list:
.BR \-e / \-\-expr ,
.BR \-c / \-\-cmd ,
.BR \-b / \-\-build ,
.BR \-n / \-\-native ,
.BR \-\-clear\-cache ,
.BR \-\-lsp ,
.BR \-\-dap ,
.BR \-\-disasm ,
.BR \-\-repl ,
.BR \-V / \-\-version ,
.BR \-h / \-\-help .
With no arguments (or \fB\-\-repl\fR) an interactive REPL is started: on a
terminal, a reedline line editor with a live stats banner, Tab completion and
\fB~/.vimlrs/history\fR; on a pipe, a plain one-statement-per-line reader.
Ctrl-D exits.
.SH "DESIGN: PORT, DON'T REINVENT"
The language semantics are ported faithfully from Neovim's C
.I eval/*
tree \(em the C source is treated as the specification rather than
re-implemented from documentation. The value layer (\fBtypval\fR, \fBlist\fR,
insertion-ordered \fBdict\fR with typed \fBtv_dict_get_*\fR/\fBtv_dict_add_*\fR,
and \fBblob\fR), the coercions, \fBtypval_compare\fR, \fBnum_divide\fR/\fBnum_modulus\fR,
and \fB:echo\fR/\fBstring()\fR rendering (\fBencode_tv2string\fR/\fBencode_tv2echo\fR)
all mirror their C counterparts.
.SH "EXECUTION PIPELINE"
.B viml
carries no VM or JIT of its own:
.PP
.RS
.nf
VimL source \(rh lexer \(rh parser (AST) \(rh lower to fusevm bytecode \(rh fusevm VM + Cranelift JIT
.fi
.RE
.PP
It lexes and parses VimL (the \fBeval1\fR...\fBeval7\fR grammar) to an AST,
lowers that to
.B fusevm
bytecode, and lets the shared engine run it \(em the same way
.B zshrs
hosts zsh.
.SH "THE JIT"
fusevm provides a three-tier Cranelift JIT, and
.B viml
is wired to use it:
.IP \(bu 3
Integer \fB+\fR/\fB\-\fR/\fB*\fR lower to native \fBOp::Add\fR/\fBSub\fR/\fBMul\fR;
integer compares to \fBOp::NumLt\fR and friends; native \fB%\fR, bitwise
\fBand\fR/\fBor\fR/\fBxor\fR/\fBinvert\fR, and numeric negation.
.IP \(bu 3
An integer expression block-JIT-compiles to machine code. A function's numeric
\fBwhile\fR loop (provably-Number locals via \fBOp::GetSlot\fR/\fBSetSlot\fR, the
loop rotated so the condition is the backedge) trace-JIT-compiles to native code.
.IP \(bu 3
Idiomatic \fBfor i in range(N)\fR lowers to a native integer counter loop (no
list is built) that trace-compiles; the bound may be dynamic.
.IP \(bu 3
Numeric loops trace at both function and script (top-level) scope; float
accumulators, compound short-circuit conditions, nested loops, ternaries, and
value-position comparisons all stay trace-eligible.
.PP
Dynamic operations stay on the \fBCallBuiltin\fR path (the deopt fallback). On a
20M-iteration loop the JIT runs roughly 15\(en100x faster than the interpreter
baseline. Set
.B VIMLRS_JIT_STATS=1
to count compiled loop traces, or
.B VIMLRS_NO_JIT=1
to force the interpreter.
.SH "SCRIPT CACHE"
Sourced scripts are compiled to fusevm bytecode and cached on disk (rkyv), so
re-running a script skips the lex/parse/lower stages.
.B \-\-clear\-cache
deletes the cache.
.SH "AOT BUILD"
.B \-\-build
\fIOUT\fR bakes the input scripts into a self-contained executable. With
.BR \-\-native ,
the build emits a standalone-linked Cranelift object (native machine code)
instead of embedding the source.
.SH STATUS
Early / in development. The value layer and coercions are ported; the
lexer/parser, AST lowering, and the JIT paths described above are working. Whole
function bodies block-compiling via native \fBOp::ReturnValue\fR, and per-loop
(rather than per-chunk) slot scoping, are in progress.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR viml (1).
Reference and engineering report: https://menketechnologies.github.io/vimlrs/ .
.B fusevm:
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/fusevm .
.SH AUTHOR
MenkeTechnologies <https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies>.
.SH LICENSE
MIT.
